---
layout: single-col
title: The Diag
date: 2017-02-19
---
{% include jumbotron.html
title="Social Action at the University of Michigan"
image="images/vietnamprotest1969.jpg"
text="The student population of the University of Michigan has never been complacent towards injustice." %}

2017 marks not only the Bicentennial of the University of Michigan, but also the first year of a presidency that has so far bucked conventions of how such an office is run. Thus, it may be helpful in our modern age to examine how the campus population has responded to similarly prescient issues in the past. A climate of social activism has always prevailed at the University of Michigan. Especially since the 1960s, U of M has been active in social movements like protesting the Vietnam War, student representation on campus, the university’s ties to South Africa, and Black Lives Matter. This essay will reveal Michigan’s past as a center for social movements, and that it has seldom been passive throughout history.

Though the 1960s would prove to be a key moment in Michigan’s history as a place of social movements, this is not to say the student body was easily manipulated before. College students can be a particularly resilient breed. In 1956, shortly before the period of increasing social unrest on campus, a disturbance involving the dining halls occurred in South Quadrangle. At the time, it was dubbed a “food riot”, though that label belies the non-violent nature of the event. Rumors circulated in November that residents were unhappy with the food, and on December 2, 1956, a group of students started booing people in South Quad that took their meals from the lunch line. This initial group of demonstrators started to “chant, stamp their feet on the floor, and pound their hands, silverware, and glasses on the tables.” (“Report on the food demonstration of Sunday, December 2, 1956”, 2)

Eventually the group of protesters swelled in number to 175 people. They were chanting phrases like “give us food, no more dog food” and “down with the dieticians”. People from West Quadrangle joined in, and eventually the size of the group reached about 1,000 people. Truly, these students were serious about their food. The demonstration ended when a group of 150 protesters, having been spurred on by a belligerent patrolman, gathered in front of the President’s House. Dean of Men Walter Rea succeeded in breaking up the riot when he said they would hear their complaints if they were brought to him officially. Notably, the Report on the food demonstration of Sunday, December 2, 1956 stresses that no damage was done to any property and there were no acts of violence (other than a few hurled snowballs) (“Report…”, 3).

Quality of dormitory food may not have been a pressing national concern, but this incident does much to situate the University of Michigan as a place where the student body actively pursues the changes it wishes to see. On October 14, 1960, John F. Kennedy gave a speech on the steps of the Michigan Union in which he proposed what would later become the Peace Corps. This speech sets the scene for a Michigan campus that became increasingly involved in issues of social injustice and unrest. From here on out, the students would take a more active role in participating in issues that pertained not only to University matters but also in the world at large.

1965 marks a time of protest for the students and faculty of U of M. On March 25 of that year, the faculty staged “teach-ins”around campus about topics of the time like the Vietnam War. They were largely against it: “The poorest peasant in Vietnam,” said Professor Kenneth Boulding of the Econ Dept., “should have as much right as the richest American.” Almost 3,000 students attended rallies with messages much like this one. (Rapoport, 1965) The atmosphere about the teach-in was tense; plenty came out in support of the faculty’s message, but plenty displayed their disdain. There were three bomb scares in the Angell Hall auditorium teach-ins, and a group of around 75 students marched through the midnight Diag rally chanting “Better dead than Red.” (Rapoport, 1965)

1965 provided another instance of protest in its latter days, this one staged by students. On October 15, 39 students and teaching fellows (GSIs) entered the Selective Service Office on E. Liberty Street (where another group had marched to the day before) at 3pm. Meanwhile, 200 pickets marched on both sides of the street. Those inside the office sat on the floor and sang civil rights songs and chanted things like “End the war in Vietnam” and “Bring the troops home now”. At 6:15 pm, the Ann Arbor police entered the building and arrested the protesters; bail was set at $100, and the University did not use its bail fund to help the students. The fund was for “unknowing individual students who were not able to raise their own bond.” (Wolter 1965, 1)

Bill Ayers, one of those arrested students, recounted the story of his 15 day stay in the Washtenaw County Jail across two issues of the Michigan Daily, on January 7th and 9th, 1968. He had some choice words for the place: “In all-American Ann Arbor, it’s odd that we have such an archaic institution. We’re supposed to be progressive, forward-looking. Why aren’t there ministers who make it their business to visit the jail periodically and find out what people’s needs and problems are? Why aren’t doctors volunteering...Why couldn’t others help organize an adequate library, sports program, or classes? I guess in Ann Arbor...people feel better when they don’t have to think about...such things as jails and prisoners.” (Ayers 1968, 4)

As if to illustrate Ayers’ point that even progressive Ann Arbor needs to see action in order to be compelled, there is the case of the Black Action Movement protest of 1970. Late in the Fall of 1969, black students at U of M decided that the university should work harder to get more students of color admitted into the college at a faster rate. Throughout January 1970, they drafted their demands, and they were invited to President Fleming’s house for a dinner and discussion. Wary of being “coopted” by the University, Black student leaders met in the Union and combined their groups into one combined front, the “Black Action Movement”. Fleming read their demands at the dinner, which included that at least 10% of the student population had to be Black by the ‘73-74 year. (Brown et. al 1978, 8-11)

Though the Regents pledged their support, they would not take firm action. It would take two instances of throwing books off the shelves of the Shapiro (the second instance involving thousands of books), interrupting of lectures around campus, and a strike that peaked with the closing of the LSA, Chemistry, and Economics Buildings, as well as Angell and Mason Halls, on March 27th, before the Regents wholeheartedly agreed to BAM’s demands. (Brown et. al 1978, 21-22)

This would not be the last time students took direct action to get their points across. In May, 1977, students at U of M actively started speaking out against Apartheid in South Africa. They lashed out at the University for “contributing support to the apartheid system in South Africa through University investments in corporations which do business there” (Yellin 1977, 1). By December 1982, Michigan passed a state law barring state colleges from “buying or maintaining stocks in U.S. corporations with divisions” in South Africa (Witt 1983, 1). These companies included GM and Ford, and stock from these companies made up $420 million of the University’s portfolio (Witt 1983, 1). However, the Regents decided to challenge the law; the University divested 99% of its

Once this law was passed, there was not much active protest until 1986. In April of that year, some 100 members of the Free South Africa Coordinating Committee on Campus refused to leave the Fleming Administration Building after the Regents refused to grant Nelson Mandela an honorary degree. They held a vigil in the meeting room, and it lasted all night. (Murakami 1986, 2B)

 Perhaps the greatest visual legacy of the anti-apartheid movement belongs to the Diag shanty constructed on March 20, 1986. This shanty house was constructed to symbolize the shacks in which most blacks were forced to live in South Africa. (“Year in Review”, 1986) Such an action is representative of the way that University of Michigan students handle social issues. They are a vocal group who point out injustice when they see it. They began with issues within their own walls, but throughout history, U of M students have become more vocal about national and worldwide problems. This pattern holds today; recent events such as the Women’s March and the March for Science were largely populated by students, and Michigan students will no doubt be as vocal as ever in the years to come.
 
 ## Sources
 
 - "Report on the food demonstration of Sunday, December 2, 1956", Food Riot 1956-1957, Box 2, Housing Division (University of Michigan) Records, Bentley Historical Library, University of Michigan
 - Rapoport, Roger. "Protest, Learning, Heckling Spark Viet Rally", *The Michigan Daily*, March 26, 1965 (vol. 75, iss. 150), 1. The Michigan Daily Digital Archives [https://digital.bentley.umich.edu/midaily/mdp.39015071754308/489](https://digital.bentley.umich.edu/midaily/mdp.39015071754308/489)
 - Wolter, Charlotte A. "Jail 'U' Students, Teaching Fellows In Draft Board Following Disobedience", *The Michigan Daily*, October 16, 1965 (vol. 76, iss. 42), 1. The Michigan Daily Digital Archives [https://digital.bentley.umich.edu/midaily/mdp.39015071754167/403](https://digital.bentley.umich.edu/midaily/mdp.39015071754167/403)
 - Ayers, Bill. "The All-American Jail--II", *The Michigan Daily*, January 9, 1968 (vol. 78, iss. 85), 4. The Michigan Daily Digital Archives [https://digital.bentley.umich.edu/midaily/mdp.39015071754001/38](https://digital.bentley.umich.edu/midaily/mdp.39015071754001/38)
 - Brown, Andy, Harley Frazis, Jim Robb, Mike Taylor, Tom Weisskopf, and Eitan Yanich. *Conflict and power on the campus: studies in the political economy of the University of Michigan*, 1978. Box 4, Residential College (University of Michigan) records, Bentley Historical Library, University of Michigan
 - Yellin, Michael. "'U' ties to South Africa blasted", *The Michigan Daily*, May 20, 1977 (vol. 87, iss. 113), 1. The Michgigan Daily Digital Archives [https://digital.bentley.umich.edu/midaily/mdp.39015071754613/173](https://digital.bentley.umich.edu/midaily/mdp.39015071754613/173)
 - Witt, Barry. "Divestment bill approved; 'U' eyes resistance", *The Michigan Daily*, January 5, 1983 (vol. 93, iss. 77), 1. The Michigan Daily Digital Archives [https://digital.bentley.umich.edu/midaily/mdp.39015071754712/3](https://digital.bentley.umich.edu/midaily/mdp.39015071754712/3)
 - Murakami, Kery. "'U' pressured over South Africa", *The Michigan Daily*, September 4, 1986 (vol. 97, iss. 1), 2B. The Michigan Daily Digital Archives [https://digital.bentley.umich.edu/midaily/mdp.39015071754787/40](https://digital.bentley.umich.edu/midaily/mdp.39015071754787/40)
 - "1985-1986 The Year In Review", *The Michigan Daily*, September 4, 1986 (vol. 97, iss. 1), 7A. The Michigan Daily Digital Archives [https://digital.bentley.umich.edu/midaily/mdp.39015071754787/40](https://digital.bentley.umich.edu/midaily/mdp.39015071754787/40)

