# The Diag

The University of Michigan’s central campus sports a walkway that cuts from its northwest corner down to its southeast. To students today, this walkway is lovingly known as “The Diag”. It is a quick way to cut across campus, and there are numerous little walkways that sprout out from its main walkway, allowing students to freely travel from building to building on central campus. This use of space makes total sense to us in the 21st century. We’re expected to do everything quickly in this day and age, and the Diag accommodates for that, making it easy to walk distances that would be cumbersome to traverse had they lacked pavement.

It is interesting to consider, then, the Diag before pavement. Indeed, as we’ll get into, the Diag used to be completely unpaved, because there was no “Diag”. The University of Michigan central campus was merely a few buildings and a natural space when it moved to Ann Arbor, a yeoman ideal that Jefferson would be proud of. What does the appearance and subsequent renovations of the Diag say about the history of the University of Michigan? Furthermore, what does it say about the history of America? To try to answer these questions, I looked at numerous maps of U of M’s central campus. These maps were found online at the Ann Arbor Historic Maps Project (part of the U of M Millennium Project) and at the Bentley Historical Library on the University of Michigan’s North Campus.

The first map I want to draw attention to is this one, drawn from the Historic Maps project. This is the University of Michigan campus in 1854. As you can see, there is no “Diag” to speak of. There appear to be some paths that are mostly for the benefit of professors, as they connect their houses to each other and the main University building. The building in the middle of the “Botanical Gardens” is the old Medicine Building. It’s interesting to see just how far the University has come in this field; in 1854, there wasn’t even a path to this building, and now the campus sports a famously large hospital and medical campus. This map is a good place to start; there isn’t much there, but what is present forms the backbone of the future central campus.

These next maps are from the Historic Maps Project as well; the top being 10 years later than the first, 1864, and the latter from 1866. There aren’t any differences between them, but the bottom is useful for visualizing the campus around this time. The top can be contrasted with the 1854 map in striking ways. There is more of a focus on the Medical Campus now; and indeed, we see the first markings of the modern Diag. It comes down from the northwest, going straight for the Medical College. So then, the Diag began as a way to quickly get to the Medical College, heretofore a bit of an isolated area.

The idea that students should be able to traverse a large space quickly was a focus of this construction from the very start. If you look at the lower map, you can see that the pastoral still plays a large role in the school’s self image; the Diag, and furthermore the whole campus, is lined with neat, apparently equidistant rows of trees. This is antebellum America; not quite the industrial powerhouse it would become by century’s end.

The period after the Civil War was a time of great expansion for the university. As the first map shows, by 1880 the Diag completed its journey from northwest to southeast, and while trees and the pastoral still play a large part in the image of this map, there are also more buildings, and ones that existed before are grander. It’s beginning to closely resemble our modern day central campus. This map also gives more character to the campus area, as later maps sometimes did. There are people playing games in the northeast corner of the Diag, in what is left of the Botanical Gardens (and what will become a gymnasium soon). The bottom map isn’t as useful for seeing a layout of the Diag, but there is a striking feature about it; the appearance of smokestacks. These large smokestacks are no longer there, but in this moment, they represent the industrial ambitions of turn of the century America.

Those smokestacks belonged to the Heating Plant and the Boiler House, buildings that are since long gone. This map approximates what the Diag looked like in the year 1900. In a 1922 map on what the University needed to expand, it is mentioned that there hadn’t been an addition to the “Literary College” since 1895, making this above map a useful resource for picturing how the main University must have looked from the turn of the century to the post-World War I years. In addition to the now extinct smokestack buildings, there is the presence of the Waterman Gymnasium in the same spot where the Chemistry Building resides today.

All of this is to prove that the Diag is necessarily a living artifact, one that changes with the times much like anything else. In this sense, it is more than just a glorified sidewalk; the Diag may be talked about like any building that resides near it. It is added on to, like new buildings that appear as the University needs them, and segments are also destroyed to make way for the new. Consider how the Heating Plant and Boiler House are now gone; as technology improves, the University decides what happens to the old.

The Diag, as I have said, is more than just a walkway, and this is because it encompasses more than a sidewalk and some foliage. It is a vast, wide space; you could really look at the Diag as though it were a park. It is a useful resource for coming together in one place, and being a student area, that is something that goes on quite a bit there. The Diag has a history of being a place where civic protest begins or is staged, and that is no less true as you go back through history:

The first image shouldn’t be entirely surprising; it comes from 1969, and is an anti-Vietnam War protest. Collective American memory has it that the 1960s were some of the more liberal years of the country, and seeing as how a document as radical as _The Port Huron Statement_ has its origins in this very University, it follows that there would be some radical action here. But the Diag provides proof that the University of Michigan has not stopped fighting for the greater good; the bottom photo shows “campers” seeking U of M divestment of stock with companies that have ties to South Africa. This comes from 1985, the Reagan era, which is collectively remembered as a more conservative. True that this is a sort of “Baby Boomer” narrative: liberal, free 1960s eventually gives way to,corporate 1980s.

 Let the Diag be proof of that narrative being flawed. The University of Michigan has always been a place where freedom of speech and freedom of congregation are not taken for granted; if we see injustice in the world, we will not remain silent.
